Abstracts are limited to 3,000 characters, including space

From the charophyte green algae to the angiosperms, plant morphology is constrained by the ability of the cell or cells constituting the apical meristem to orient their cell division planes. Specifically, plants with apical cells that exhibit one, two, or three-dimensional control of the division plane possess filamentous, planar/branched filamentous, or parenchymatous morhologies, respectively. The gametophyte phase of the moss Physcomitrella patens includes a transition from two-dimensional to three-dimensional growth that is initiated by a series of oblique, asymmetric cell divisions in the bud that produce a single tetrahedral cell that is the shoot apical meristem (SAM). The formation of the apical cell requires the initiation of a genetic program to control cell growth and division in a manner that both overrides hypothesized rules for default cell division plane orientation and reflects how these processes evolved after the colonization of land. This cell continuously grows and divides to pattern leaf (phyllid) poisitioning while replenshing itself throughout shoot development, equivalent in function to an angiosperm SAM. The moss SAM thus provides a system for study where the processes of cell growth, cell division, and stem cell homeostasis are tightly coordinated during morphogenesis. Previous research discovered a high degree of overlap between the transcriptomes of moss and angiosperm SAMs, suggesting that the equivalent functions fulfilled by these structures are likely regulated by homologous gene regulatory networks that evolved concurrently with three-dimensional body plans. We test this hypothesis by investigating the function of a set of genes upregulated in the moss SAM that are orthologous to Arabidopsis Thaliana receptor kinases of two clades, the first containing CLAVATA1 (CLV1), BARELY ANY MERISTEM 1 (BAM1), BAM2, and BAM3; the second contianing RECEPTOR-LIKE PROTEIN KINASE 2 (RPK2). These receptors are classical regulators of stem cell maintenance in angiosperms, and we demonstrate that they have a conserved role in the Physcomitrella gametophore. Mutants of the moss CLAVATA1-LIKE1b gene - one of two CLV1 paralogs in Physcomitrella - display varied but abnormal division planes in buds and form numerous ectopic meristems at the gametophore base that fail to grow normally, indicating a derepression of meristematic identity there. This phenotype is less severe than that of the rpk2 mutant, where the division plane defects are drastic and shoots abort early on as masses of cells. Importantly, ectopic meristems are sometimes seen on rpk2 shoots, establishing a common theme for the regulatory function of the moss CLL and RPK2 genes parallel to their orthologs in Arabidopsis. 
